Now that we've learned about event logs,
let's turn our attention to monitoring network traffic.
By the end of this section,
you will understand why you should monitor traffic,
choose the types of traffic to monitor in your organization,
what methods are available to collect data,
view active connections in Windows and Linux.
Finally, interpret reports from network devices.
Where does monitoring network traffic fit in our three component model of security?
Somewhat in prevention, but primarily in detection and response.
Why should we monitor traffic at all?
At a bare minimum,
every organization should monitor firewall logs for
failed attacks as well as suspicious successful connections.
These are generally the first sign of an attack.
As we learned earlier, by monitoring traffic,
you can intercept some performance problems before they become big problems.
You can use network traffic and
other performance statistics to know when to scale your operations.
Finally, many compliance regulations require monitoring of specific devices.
The types of traffic you'll want to monitor
vary greatly from organization to organization.
However, there are some fundamentals worth covering.
As previously stated, you'll want to monitor your firewall closely.
Think of your firewall as the first alarm to sound in a potential attack.
If your organization has a public facing presence,
you'll want to monitor all traffic to and from it.
It's possible your public facing servers will run as normal while being compromised.
It is a good idea to monitor the logs on your wireless network,
particularly if your organization has nearby neighbors.
Anywhere you have sensitive data or intellectual property,
you will want to know what traffic is coming and going.
The last thing your organization wants is to
notify customers and partners of a data breach.
There will no doubt be traffic specific to your organization that you'll want to monitor.
With so many different types of devices communicating,
there are likely hundreds of collection methods.
We're going to take a high-level look at several of the most common.
NetFlow is a Cisco proprietary technology
that allows the collection of data on network traffic.
It collects information on source IP,
destination IP, source port,
destination port, and protocol.
SFlow is an open standards version that can be used on other products.
These are excellent for collecting statistics on items such as switches and routers.
SNMP, Simple Network Management Protocol,
performs similarly to NetFlow.
There are security risks to consider before implementing SNMP,
such as traffic sniffing,
man in the middle, and brute force attacks.
Wireshark is a free and open source packet analyzer.
It is used for network troubleshooting,
analysis software, and communications.
Netstat stands for network statistics and as
a command line utility to show active connections and routing information on hosts.
We'll be taking a closer look at this in a moment.
Perfmon is a Windows performance monitor
that provides tools for analyzing system performance.
It is likely your organization will run several of these and
potentially more to collect the data desired for your monitoring solution.
Whether trouble-shooting an application issue
or investigating if a machine is compromised,
viewing active connections can yield valuable information.
We'll use Netstat and Perfmon to see what's connecting to your machine.
You can use your own windows machine or connect to the server provided.
Hit the "Windows" key and type PowerShell and hit "Enter".
Then type Netstat.
The local address is the address of the machine we're on,
the multiple listings are representing different connections.
The foreign connections are all the IP addresses our machine is connected to.
As you can see, this could be very valuable in researching an issue.
Now let's try Perfmon.
Hit the Windows key and R to pull up a run dialog,
type Perfmon /res and hit "Enter".
You should see something similar to this.
While it does not include as much information as Netstat,
it does include the PID by default.
The PID is the process ID that could help you
track down an application if you noticed something suspicious.